Advanced Topics
===============

This page covers features for power users and administrators.

Auth-Protected Deployments
--------------------------

Mampok can deploy tools behind a Gatekeeper authentication proxy. When
``deployment.auth: true``, access to the deployment URL requires a valid
JWT token.

**Prerequisites**

The ``auth_proxy`` section must be configured in ``config.json`` (see
:doc:`configuration`).

**Deploying with auth**

Set ``auth: true`` in the Mamplan's ``deployment`` section::

    "deployment": {
      "auth": true,
      ...
    }

Or use ``create-mamplan``::

    mampok create-mamplan --auth ...

**What Mampok creates**

With ``auth: true``, Mampok additionally:

1. Creates a Kubernetes Secret containing a JWT secret key and the list of
   authorized users.
2. Adds a Gatekeeper sidecar container to the Deployment.
3. Merges ``auth_proxy.auth_annotations`` from config into the Ingress
   annotations.

The Gatekeeper sidecar validates incoming requests against the JWT secret.

**Token URL**

After deployment, ``mampok deploy`` or ``mampok update-auth`` prints a
**token URL** — a URL with a pre-embedded JWT token. Share this URL with the
users listed in ``service.organization`` and ``service.user``.

**Updating auth without redeployment**

To change the user list or rotate the secret key without redeploying::

    mampok update-auth my-project-mamplan.json -Y

This regenerates the Kubernetes Secret and prints the new token URL. No pod
restart is required.

**User list derivation**

The authorized user list is derived from ``service.organization`` plus
``service.user``. If ``"public"`` appears in ``service.organization``, the
deployment is treated as publicly accessible.

.. _shmamplan:

SHMamplan (Software Hub Mode)
------------------------------

A **SHMamplan** (Software Hub Mamplan) is a lightweight variant of the
standard Mamplan. It is designed for deployments managed by a Software Hub
portal where each user gets their own instance of a tool.

Key differences from a regular Mamplan:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 30 35

   * - Feature
     - Mamplan
     - SHMamplan
   * - Schema
     - Full (project, deployment, service)
     - Simplified (project, deployment, service with fewer fields)
   * - Auth
     - Optional
     - Always enabled
   * - Required service fields
     - owner, analyst, datatype, organization, user
     - owner only
   * - Filename suffix
     - ``-mamplan.json``
     - ``-shmamplan.json``

SHMamplan files are automatically detected by the ``-shmamplan.json`` suffix
and are loaded alongside regular Mamplans when scanning a repository.

**Creating a SHMamplan via the Python API**

The Python API provides a dedicated method (see :doc:`python_api`)::

    from mampok.interfaces.api import API

    api = API("~/.mampok/config.json")
    project_id = api.create_sh_mamplan(
        output="/path/to/mamplans/",
        username="alice",
        tool="cellxgene",
        bucket="alice-cellxgene-bucket",
        cluster="BN",
    )

This creates ``alice-cellxgene-mamplan.json`` with auth always set to
``true``.

Automated Expiry Management
---------------------------

For production deployments, it is recommended to run ``stop-expired``
automatically on a schedule to clean up overdue projects.

**Cron job example** (runs daily at 2 AM)::

    0 2 * * * /path/to/mampok stop-expired /home/user/mamplans/ \
      --config /home/user/.mampok/config.json -Y \
      >> /var/log/mampok-expire.log 2>&1

The exit code is ``1`` if any projects failed to stop. You can use this
for monitoring::

    mampok stop-expired ~/mamplans/ -Y || notify_on_failure

**Pre-expiry alerting**

Use ``list-expiring`` to get warned before projects expire::

    # Projects expiring in the next 7 days
    mampok list-expiring ~/mamplans/ --within 7d

    # Projects expiring in the next 2 weeks
    mampok list-expiring ~/mamplans/ --within 2w

Error Tolerance
---------------

By default, Mampok's batch commands (``deploy``, ``stop``, ``redeploy``,
``stop-expired``, ``check-status``, ``update-auth``, ``download``) process
all Mamplans even when individual ones fail. Errors are collected and
printed as a summary at the end. The exit code is ``1`` if any errors
occurred.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 60

   * - Behavior
     - Description
   * - Default (tolerant)
     - Process all Mamplans; collect errors; print summary at end; exit
       code 1 if any failed.
   * - ``--throw-error``
     - Abort immediately on the first failure; no summary; exit code 1.

Use ``--throw-error`` for scripts where partial success is unacceptable (e.g.
deployment pipelines that expect all-or-nothing semantics).

Working with Metadata Files
----------------------------

The ``--metadata-file`` option of ``mampok create-mamplan`` accepts one or
more YAML files that populate the service section automatically. This is
useful when project metadata is generated by an analysis pipeline.

**Example metadata YAML**::

    project:
      owner:
        ldap_name: jdoe
        full_name: Jane Doe
      nerd:
        - ldap_name: alice
          full_name: Alice Smith
      organization:
        - mpi-bn
      datatype:
        - scRNA-seq
      metadata:
        - GSE123456

The fields are mapped as follows:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 35 35

   * - YAML path
     - Mamplan field
   * - ``project.owner.ldap_name``
     - ``service.owner``
   * - ``project.nerd[].ldap_name``
     - ``service.analyst``
   * - ``project.organization``
     - ``service.organization``
   * - ``project.datatype``
     - ``service.datatype``
   * - ``project.metadata``
     - ``service.metadata``

Explicit CLI flags (``--owner``, ``--analyst``, etc.) take precedence over
values from the metadata file for scalar fields. For list fields, the values
are merged.

Relative Lifetime Syntax
------------------------

The ``edit-mamplan`` command supports a ``+Nd/w/m`` offset syntax for the
``deployment:lifetime`` field. The offset is added to the **existing lifetime**
in the Mamplan — not to today.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 55

   * - Token
     - Effect
   * - ``+30d``
     - Add 30 days to the current lifetime
   * - ``+4w``
     - Add 4 weeks (28 days) to the current lifetime
   * - ``+3m``
     - Add 3 months (90 days) to the current lifetime

Example — renewing a project that expires on 2026-05-01 by 30 days::

    mampok edit-mamplan my-project-mamplan.json \
      -e deployment:lifetime:+30d -Y
    # new lifetime: 2026-05-31T...

This is the canonical way to renew a project. Repeated renewal is safe
because each extension builds on the previous expiry date.

Container Data Persistence Patterns
-------------------------------------

See :ref:`s3-persistence` in :doc:`mamplates` for the field reference.
Here is guidance on which mechanism to choose:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 35 35

   * - Tool type
     - Recommended mechanism
     - Reason
   * - Cellxgene, IGV, WilsON
     - ``container_data``
     - Users generate annotation files in specific paths; selective sync
       is sufficient and avoids syncing unnecessary data.
   * - RStudio, Jupyter
     - ``full_bucket_overwrite``
     - The entire working directory is the user's workspace; bidirectional
       sync keeps it consistent across redeployments.
   * - Read-only viewers
     - Neither (no ``container_data``)
     - No user-generated output to persist.

Custom URL IDs
--------------

By default, the deployment URL uses ``project_id`` as the path segment::

    https://ingress.example.com/my-cellxgene-project

You can override this with ``custom_url_id`` in the Mamplan::

    "deployment": {
      "custom_url_id": "mouse-atlas",
      ...
    }

Result::

    https://ingress.example.com/mouse-atlas

Alternatively, ``random_url_suffix: true`` appends five random characters::

    https://ingress.example.com/my-cellxgene-project-a3f7k

This provides light obfuscation without requiring auth.
